---
layout: post
title:  "Visualise, don't optimise"
date:   2016-09-23 19:09:09 +0000
---

I had a good discussion with a chap called Marios whom I met at one of the many
great pro-Agile evening events in Leeds. He was there with an interest in
improving things at his job as a mechanical engineer and wasn't really aware of
the state of affairs in the software world, so I expect he was a bit
overwhelmed with jargon by the end.

Marios was frustrated with the waste and inefficiency that he could see in his
company, and being young and idealistic was trying to work out ways to fix
everything.

![fix all the things]({{ "/assets/2016-09-23-fix-all-the-things.png" | relative_url }})

My advice, being young and cynical, was that this sort of thing tends not to
succeed. A bit more helpfully, we explored some of the problems he was talking
about and they seemed like the sorts of things that you could put into
pictures: things like a Kanban board or a burnup chart that'd highlight where
the obvious (to him) bottlenecks were. Moreover, it seemed like it might be possible
to visualise them in near real-time without too much more effort.

We thought a bit more about what the consequences of this would be, and came to
the conclusion that this might be enough. Once he was showing some pictures
that highlighted the problems they were facing, it'd be a lot easier to get his
colleagues on board with fixing these problems. In fact, it was entirely
possible that visualising the problems would have been enough for them to be
resolved naturally.

We came up with the phrase

> Visualise, don't optimise

to describe the idea that rather than fixing problems yourself it's often good
enough to believe that the problems are there simply because people can't see
them, and once they can see them they're conscientious enough to fix them
themselves.
